update E6: raster introduction (#10)
esciencecenter-digital-skills/geospatial-python: _episodes/06-raster-intro.md

> ---

Author: Indeed. I have documented this in #21. Maybe we can finalize the content first and update the table of contents in one go later.

> ---

Reviewer: sounds good to do this in a separate pr. there might be a conflict with the episode @fnattino just worked on since that is also listed as episode 5 like this one is right now. I'm not sure how TOC order is assigned but we can fix it once all the content prs are in

title: "Read and visualize raster data"
teaching: 40
exercises: 20
questions:

> -  "What is a raster dataset?"

Author: ```suggestion
-  "How is a raster represented by rioxarray?"
```

-  "How do I read and plot raster data in Python?"
-  "How can I handle missing data?"

objectives:
-  "Describe the fundamental attributes of a raster dataset."
-  "Explore raster attributes and metadata using Python."
-  "Read rasters into Python using the `rioxarray` package."
-  "Visualize single/multi-band raster data."

keypoints:
- "`rioxarray` and `xarray` are for working with multidimensional arrays like pandas is for working with tabular data."
- "`rioxarray` stores CRS information as a CRS object that can be converted to an EPSG code or PROJ4 string."
- "Missing raster data are filled with nodata values, which should be handled with care for statistics and visualization."
---

> In this episode, we will introduce the fundamental principles, packages and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This episode introduces the fundamental principles, packages and
```

> metadata/raster attributes that are needed to work with raster data in Python. We will discuss some of the core metadata elements like Coordinate Reference Systems (CRS), no data values, and resolution. We will also explore missing and bad data values as stored in a raster and how Python handles these elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metadata/raster attributes for working with raster data in Python. We will also explore how Python handles missing and bad data values.
```

> We will use a Python package in this episode to work with raster data -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`rioxarray`](https://corteva.github.io/rioxarray/stable/) is the Python package we will use throughout this lesson to work with raster data.
```

> [`rioxarray`](https://corteva.github.io/rioxarray/stable/),

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> which is based on the popular [`rasterio`](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) package for working with rasters and [`xarray`](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/) for working with multi-dimensional arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is based on the popular [`rasterio`](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) package for working with rasters and [`xarray`](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/) for working with multi-dimensional arrays.
```

> We will also use the [`pystac`](https://github.com/stac-utils/pystac) package to load raster from the searching results from the exercise of the previous episode. This would not be necessary if you skipped it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also use the [`pystac`](https://github.com/stac-utils/pystac) package to load rasters from the search results we created in the previous episode.
```

I deleted the last sentence since I'm not quite sure what it refers to. I think we want each episode to be self contained and this episode is, but I think we also want to encourage folks to follow the lessons in order as a default. I think leaving out mention of skipping encourages this default.

> ## Introduce the Data
>

> > In this episode, we will continue from the `search.json` file, which we saved in an exercise from the previous episode. We will use one scene in the searching results as an example, and demonstrate the data loading and visualization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We'll continue from the `search.json` file, which we saved in an exercise from the previous episode. One scene in the search results will serve as an example and demonstrate data loading and visualization.
```

>

> > If you have skipped the previous episode on data accessing, you can download the same raster data from the [data repository](ToDo: add link) of this lesson.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you would like to work with the data for this lesson without using pystac, you can download the same raster data from the [data repository](ToDo: add link) of this lesson. This can be useful if you need to download the data ahead of time to work through the lesson if you are without internet, or if you want to work with the data in a different GIS.
```
specified why someone would want to not use pystac, removed the word "skip"

{: .callout}

## Load a Raster and View Attributes

> In the previous episode, we did an exercise searching Sentinel-2 images, and then saved the searching results to `search.json`. This file contains the information on where and how to access the target images from a remote repository. We can use the function `pystac.ItemCollection.from_file()` to load the searching results as an `Item` list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous episode, we searched for Sentinel-2 images, and then saved the search results to a file:`search.json`. This contains the information on where and how to access the target images from a remote repository. We can use the function `pystac.ItemCollection.from_file()` to load the search results as an `Item` list.
```

~~~
import pystac
items = pystac.ItemCollection.from_file("search.json")
~~~
{: .language-python}

> In the searching results, we have 2 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 26th and 28th in 2020. We will focus on the first scene `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load the band `B09` (central wavelength 945 nm). We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the search results, we have 2 `Item` type objects, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 26th and 28th in 2020. We will focus on the first scene `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load band `B09` (central wavelength 945 nm). We can load this band using the function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href` (commonly referred to as a URL):
```

~~~
import rioxarray
raster_ams_b9 = rioxarray.open_rasterio(items[0].assets["B09"].href)
~~~
{: .language-python}

By calling the variable name in the jupyter notebook we can get a quick look at the shape and attributes of the data.
~~~
raster_ams_b9
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
<xarray.DataArray (band: 1, y: 1830, x: 1830)>
[3348900 values with dtype=uint16]
Coordinates:
  * band         (band) int64 1
  * x            (x) float64 6e+05 6.001e+05 6.002e+05 ... 7.097e+05 7.098e+05
  * y            (y) float64 5.9e+06 5.9e+06 5.9e+06 ... 5.79e+06 5.79e+06
    spatial_ref  int64 0
Attributes:
    _FillValue:    0.0
    scale_factor:  1.0
    add_offset:    0.0
~~~
{: .output}

> The first call to `rioxarray.open_rasterio()` opens the file from remote or local storage, and then returns a `xarray.DataArray` object. The object is stored in a variable, i.e. `raster_ams_b9`. Reading in the data with `xarray` instead of `rioxarray` also returns a `xarray.DataArray`, but the output will not contain the geospatial metadata (such as projection information). You can use a `xarray.DataArray` in calculations just like a numpy array. Calling the variable name of the `DataArray` also prints out all of its metadata information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first call to `rioxarray.open_rasterio()` opens the file from remote or local storage, and then returns a `xarray.DataArray` object. The object is stored in a variable, i.e. `raster_ams_b9`. Reading in the data with `xarray` instead of `rioxarray` also returns a `xarray.DataArray`, but the output will not contain the geospatial metadata (such as projection information). You can use numpy functions or built-in Python math operators on a `xarray.DataArray` just like a numpy array. Calling the variable name of the `DataArray` also prints out all of its metadata information.
```

This `DataArray` object also has a couple of attributes that are accessed like `.rio.crs`, `.rio.nodata`, and `.rio.bounds()`, which contain the metadata for the file we opened. Note that many of the metadata are accessed as attributes without `()`, but `bounds()` is a function and needs parentheses. 

~~~
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.crs)
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.nodata)
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.bounds())
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.width)
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.height)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
EPSG:32631
0
(600000.0, 5790240.0, 709800.0, 5900040.0)
1830
1830
~~~
{: .output}

The Coordinate Reference System, or `raster_ams_b9.rio.crs`, is reported as the string `EPSG:32631`. The `nodata` value is encoded as 0 and the bounding box corners of our raster are represented by the output of `.bounds()` as a `tuple` (like a list but you can't edit it). The height and width match what we saw when we printed the `DataArray`, but by using `.rio.width` and `.rio.height` we can access these values if we need them in calculations.

We will be exploring this data throughout this episode. By the end of this episode, you will be able to understand and explain the metadata output.

> > ## Tip - Variable names

Reviewer: good tip!

Author: thx!

After viewing the attributes of our raster, we can examine the raw values of the array with `.values`:

~~~
raster_ams_b9.values
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
array([[[    0,     0,     0, ...,  8888,  9075,  8139],
        [    0,     0,     0, ..., 10444, 10358,  8669],
        [    0,     0,     0, ..., 10346, 10659,  9168],
        ...,
        [    0,     0,     0, ...,  4295,  4289,  4320],
        [    0,     0,     0, ...,  4291,  4269,  4179],
        [    0,     0,     0, ...,  3944,  3503,  3862]]], dtype=uint16)
~~~
{: .output}

This can give us a quick view of the values of our array, but only at the corners. Since our raster is loaded in python as a `DataArray` type, we can plot this in one line similar to a pandas `DataFrame` with `DataArray.plot()`.

~~~
raster_ams_b9.plot()
~~~
{: .language-python}

<img src="../fig/E06-01-overview-plot-B09.png" title="Raster plot with rioxarray" alt="Raster plot with defualt setting" width="612" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

Nice plot! Notice that `rioxarray` helpfully allows us to plot this raster with spatial coordinates on the x and y axis (this is not the default in many cases with other functions or libraries).

> This plot shows the satellite measurement of the spectral band `B09` for an area that covers part of the Netherlands. According to the [Sentinel-2 documentaion](https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-2-msi/msi-instrument), this is a band with the central wavelength of 945nm, which is sensitive to water vapor. It has a spatial resolution of 60m. Note that the `band=1` in the image title indicates the total number of bands in the `DataArray`, but not the Sentinel-2 band number `B09`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This plot shows the satellite measurement of the spectral band `B09` for an area that covers part of the Netherlands. According to the [Sentinel-2 documentaion](https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-2-msi/msi-instrument), this is a band with the central wavelength of 945nm, which is sensitive to water vapor. It has a spatial resolution of 60m. Note that the `band=1` in the image title refers to the ordering of all the bands in the  `DataArray`, not the Sentinel-2 band number `B09` that we saw in the pystac search results. 
```

> In a quick view of the image, we can notice that half of the image is blank. We also see that the pixels with high reflectance values are the clouds at the top, and the contrast of everything else is quite low. This is expected because this band is sensitive to the water vapor. However if one would like to have a better color contrast, one can add the option `robust=True`, which displays values between the 2nd and 98th percentile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a quick view of the image, we notice that half of the image is blank, no data is captured. We also see that the cloudy pixels at the top have high reflectance values, while the contrast of everything else is quite low. This is expected because this band is sensitive to the water vapor. However if one would like to have a better color contrast, one can add the option `robust=True`, which displays values between the 2nd and 98th percentile:
```

Reviewer: do we want to mention in this lesson how to clip by other percentile values? this was mentioned in the old version by necessity since robust = True didn't always lead to a good viz

Reviewer: maybe in a tooltip?

Author: Hi Ryan, thx for the comment! Indeed `robust=True` does not always work. The other away I can think of is specifying the `vmin` and `vmax` value directly. Then one need to convert the percentile to these two values. I will briefly add one line mentioning this.

~~~
raster_ams_b9.plot(robust=True)
~~~
{: .language-python}
<img src="../fig/E06-02-overview-plot-B09-robust.png" title="Raster plot with rioxarray using the robust setting" alt="Raster plot with robust setting" width="612" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

Now the color limit is set in a way fitting most of the values in the image. We have a better view of the ground pixels.

## View Raster Coordinate Reference System (CRS) in Python
Another information that we're interested in is the CRS, and it can be accessed with `.rio.crs`. We introduced the concept of a CRS in [an earlier
episode]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/03-crs.md %}).
Now we will see how features of the CRS appear in our data file and what

> meanings they have. We can view the CRS string associated with our Python object using the `crs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meanings they have. We can view the CRS string associated with our DataArray's `rio` object using the `crs`
```
not sure if this is the best way to describe this but I wanted to call out what object is being referred to since this trips up folks new to python and rioxarray

attribute.

~~~
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.crs)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
EPSG:32631
~~~
{: .output}

> To just print the EPSG code number as an `int`, we use the `.to_epsg()` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To print the EPSG code number as an `int`, we use the `.to_epsg()` method:
```

~~~
raster_ams_b9.rio.crs.to_epsg()
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
32631
~~~
{: .output}

> EPSG codes are great for succinctly representing a particular coordinate reference system. But what if we want to see information about the CRS? For that, we can use `pyproj`, a library for representing and working with coordinate reference systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EPSG codes are great for succinctly representing a particular coordinate reference system. But what if we want to see more details about the CRS, like the units? For that, we can use `pyproj`, a library for representing and working with coordinate reference systems.
```

- bounds: (0.0, 0.0, 6.0, 84.0)
Coordinate Operation:
- name: UTM zone 31N
- method: Transverse Mercator
Datum: World Geodetic System 1984 ensemble
- Ellipsoid: WGS 84
- Prime Meridian: Greenwich
~~~
{: .output}

The `CRS` class from the `pyproj` library allows us to create a `CRS` object with methods and attributes for accessing specific information about a CRS, or the detailed summary shown above.

A particularly useful attribute is `area_of_use`, which shows the geographic bounds that the CRS is intended to be used.

~~~
crs.area_of_use
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
AreaOfUse(west=0.0, south=0.0, east=6.0, north=84.0, name='Between 0°E and 6°E, northern hemisphere between equator and 84°N, onshore and offshore. Algeria. Andorra. Belgium. Benin. Burkina Faso. Denmark - North Sea. France. Germany - North Sea. Ghana. Luxembourg. Mali. Netherlands. Niger. Nigeria. Norway. Spain. Togo. United Kingdom (UK) - North Sea.')
~~~
{: .output}

> ## Exercise: find the axes units of the CRS
> What units are our data in? See if you can find a method to examine this information using `help(crs)` or `dir(crs)`
>
> > ## Answers

> > > `crs.axis_info` tells us that our CRS for our raster has two axis and both are in meters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > `crs.axis_info` tells us that the CRS for our raster has two axis and both are in meters.
```

## Raster Bands
So far we looked into a single band raster, i.e. the `B09` band of a Sentinel-2 scene. However, to get an overview of the scene, one may also want to visualize the true-color thumbnail of the region. This is provided as a multi-band raster -- a raster dataset that contains more than one band. 

![Multi-band raster image](../images/dc-spatial-raster/single_multi_raster.png)

The `overview` asset in the Sentinel-2 scene is a multiband asset. Similar to `B09`, we can load it by:
~~~
raster_ams_overview = rioxarray.open_rasterio(items[0].assets['overview'].href)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
<xarray.DataArray (band: 3, y: 343, x: 343)>
[352947 values with dtype=uint8]
Coordinates:
  * band         (band) int64 1 2 3
  * x            (x) float64 6.002e+05 6.005e+05 ... 7.093e+05 7.096e+05
  * y            (y) float64 5.9e+06 5.9e+06 5.899e+06 ... 5.791e+06 5.79e+06
    spatial_ref  int64 0
Attributes:
    _FillValue:    0.0
    scale_factor:  1.0
    add_offset:    0.0
~~~
{: .output}

> The band number comes first when GeoTiffs are read with the `.open_rasterio()` function. As we can see in the `xarray.DataArray` object, the shape is `(band: 3, y: 343, x: 343)` now. There are three bands in the `xarray.DataArray` now. It's always a good idea to examine the shape of the raster array you are working with and make sure it's what you expect. Many functions, especially the ones that plot images, expect a raster array to have a particular shape. One can also check the shape using the `.shape` attribute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The band number comes first when GeoTiffs are read with the `.open_rasterio()` function. As we can see in the `xarray.DataArray` object, the shape is now `(band: 3, y: 343, x: 343)`, with three bands in the `band` dimension. It's always a good idea to examine the shape of the raster array you are working with and make sure it's what you expect. Many functions, especially the ones that plot images, expect a raster array to have a particular shape. One can also check the shape using the `.shape` attribute:
```

~~~
raster_ams_overview.shape
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
(3, 343, 343)
~~~
{: .output}

One can visualize the multi-band data with the `DataArray.plot.imshow()` function:
~~~
raster_ams_overview.plot.imshow()
~~~
{: .language-python}

![Amsterdam true color overview](../fig/E06-04-overview-plot-true-color.png)

> Note that the `DataArray.plot.imshow()` function make pre-assumptions on the RGB channels. It does not work directly on the multi-band data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the `DataArray.plot.imshow()` function makes assumptions about the shape of the input DataArray, that since it has three channels, the correct colormap for these channels is RGB. It does not work directly on image arrays with more than 3 channels. However, the `cmap` argument can be used to create false color composites.
```

Reviewer: should we show a false color composite example? could be cool to show the power of imshow and that rioxarray isn't purely limited to RGB data, which I could see folks who are new assuming based on the original description.

Author: Hi Ryan, indeed this is more interesting! The general motivation of plotting the `overview` is because it is simple. 

To visualize a false image, we need to:

- Retrieve B02 (Blue), B03(Green) and B08(NIR) respectively
- Downsample them to a plottable size with `reproject function`
- Normalize the value to [0,255)
- Concrate the bands with with `xarray`

IMO this is a bit overcomplicated in the raster intro. I can a briefly mention that one could also plot a false value image by XYZ steps. Do you think this is sufficient?

Reviewer: I think your edit and explanation of false color is correct. The cmap arg wouldn't actually change, my mistake. This looks good for now, another episode can contain this example.

---
title: "Read and visualize raster data"
teaching: 40
exercises: 20
questions:
-  "What is a raster dataset?"
-  "How do I read and plot raster data in Python?"

> -  "How can I handle missing values for a raster?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  "How can I handle missing values?"
```

objectives:
-  "Describe the fundamental attributes of a raster dataset."
-  "Explore raster attributes and metadata using Python."
-  "Read rasters into Python using the `rioxarray` package."

> -  "Visualize single-/multi- band raster data."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  "Visualize single/multi-band raster data."
```

keypoints:
- "One can use `rioxarray.open_rasterio()` to read raster data"
- "`rioxarray` stores CRS information as a CRS object that can be converted to an EPSG code or PROJ4 string."

> - "It is good to consider using nan to represent no data value(s), for statistics and visualization. "

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "Consider using `NaN` to represent no data value(s) for statistics and visualization."
```

Author: @fnattino I think we should indeed suggest using NaNs to encode the missing value? Since it can be handled well by most visualization/statistics packages?

Author: I eventually changed into this:

```
- "`rioxarray` and `xarray` are for working with multidimensional arrays like pandas is for working with tabular data."
- "`rioxarray` stores CRS information as a CRS object that can be converted to an EPSG code or PROJ4 string."
- "Missing raster data are filled with nodata values, which should be handled with care for statistics and visualization."
```

- "The `DataArray.plot()` function can be used to visualize single-band raster. Consider using the `robust=True` option for a better color limit."
- "The `DataArray.plot.imshow()` function can be used to visualize multi-band raster."
---

> ## Things You'll Need To Complete This Episode
>

> > See the [lesson homepage]({{ site.baseurl }}) for detailed information about the software,

Reviewer 2: shouldn't this be `setup` page instead of `homepage`?

> data, and other prerequisites you will need to work through the examples in this episode.
{: .prereq}

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

# Introduction 

```

In this episode, we will introduce the fundamental principles, packages and

> metadata/raster attributes that are needed to work with raster data in Python. We will discuss some of the core metadata elements that we need to understand to work with rasters, including Coordinate Reference Systems, no data values, and resolution. We will also explore missing and bad data values as stored in a raster and how Python handles these elements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metadata/raster attributes that are needed to work with raster data in Python. We will discuss some of the core metadata elements like Coordinate Reference Systems (CRS), no data values, and resolution. We will also explore missing and bad data values as stored in a raster and how Python handles these elements.
```

Reviewer 2: here I suggested removing `that we need to understand to work with rasters, including` to avoid duplications. This part is already mentioned in the previous sentence.

We will use a Python package in this episode to work with raster data -
[`rioxarray`](https://corteva.github.io/rioxarray/stable/),
which is based on the popular [`rasterio`](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) package for working with rasters and [`xarray`](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/) for working with multi-dimensional arrays.

We will also use the [`pystac`](https://github.com/stac-utils/pystac) package to load raster from the searching results from the exercise of the previous episode. This would not be necessary if you skipped it.

> Make sure that you have `rioxarray` and `pystac` (optional) installed and imported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: if participants activate the environment and run `jupyter lab`, these things are already in place.

~~~
import rioxarray

> import pystac # Not required if you skipped the previous episode 

Reviewer 2: I think that `pystac` should be imported because it is used below.

> ~~~
> import rioxarray
> import pystac # Not required if you skipped the previous episode 
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: lets add them in its own code block below.

> ## Introduce the Data
>
> In this episode, we will continue from the `search.json` file, which we saved in an exercise from the previous episode. We will use one scene in the searching results as an example, and demonstrate the data loading and visualization.
>
> If you have skipped the previous episode on data accessing, you can download the same raster data from the [data repository](ToDo: add link) of this lesson.
{: .callout}

## Load a Raster and View Attributes

In the previous episode, we did an exercise searching Sentinel-2 images, and then saved the searching results to `search.json`. This file contains the information on where and how to access the target images from a remote repository. We can use the function `pystac.ItemCollection.from_file()` to load the searching results as an `Item` list.

~~~

> items = pystac.ItemCollection.from_file("search.json")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import pystac
items = pystac.ItemCollection.from_file("search.json")
```

> [item for item in items]

Author: ```suggestion
[item for item in items]
```

~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~

> [<Item id=S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2B_31UFU_20200326_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2B_31UFU_20200323_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2A_31UFU_20200321_0_L2A>]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[<Item id=S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A>, <Item id=S2B_31UFU_20200326_0_L2A>]
```

Author: I agree with Francesco on keeping the details to the minimum. Hence I will remove the details of the Items.

> ~~~
> [<Item id=S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2B_31UFU_20200326_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2B_31UFU_20200323_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2A_31UFU_20200321_0_L2A>]
> ~~~
> {: .output}

Author: ```suggestion
```

> ~~~
> [<Item id=S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2B_31UFU_20200326_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2B_31UFU_20200323_0_L2A>,
>  <Item id=S2A_31UFU_20200321_0_L2A>]
> ~~~
> {: .output}

Author: ```suggestion
```

> In the searching results, we have 4 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 21 to 28 in 2020. We will focus on the first scene: `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load one band: `B09` from it. We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the searching results, we have 4 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 21 to 28 in 2020. We will focus on the first scene `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load the band `B09`. We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()` via the Hypertext Reference `href`:
```

> In the searching results, we have 4 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 21 to 28 in 2020. We will focus on the first scene: `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load one band: `B09` from it. We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the searching results, we have 2 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 26th and 28th in 2020. We will focus on the first scene: `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load one band: `B09` from it. We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href`:
```

Reviewer 2: please see [Scenes to be used throughout the lesson](https://github.com/esciencecenter-digital-skills/geospatial-python/issues/7).

Author: ```suggestion
In the searching results, we have 2 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 26th and 28th in 2020. We will focus on the first scene `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load the band `B09` (central wavelength 945 nm). We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href`:
```

> In the searching results, we have 4 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 21 to 28 in 2020. We will focus on the first scene: `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load one band: `B09` from it. We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href`:

Author: ```suggestion
In the searching results, we have 2 `Item`, corresponding to 4 Sentinel-2 scenes from March 26th and 28th in 2020. We will focus on the first scene `S2A_31UFU_20200328_0_L2A`, and load the band `B09` (central wavelength 945 nm). We can load this band using function `rioxarray.open_rasterio()`, via the Hypertext Reference `href`:
```

~~~

> raster_ams_b9 = rioxarray.open_rasterio(items[0].assets["B09"].href)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import rioxarray
raster_ams_b9 = rioxarray.open_rasterio(items[0].assets["B09"].href)
```

~~~
{: .language-python}

> 
> If the data accessing episode is skipped, you can also directly load the raster from the downloaded image:
> ~~~
> raster_ams_b9 = rioxarray.open_rasterio('ToDo:path/to/the/downloaded/raster')
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: It is already mentioned above.

This `DataArray` object also has a couple of attributes that are accessed like `.rio.crs`, `.rio.nodata`, and `.rio.bounds()`, which contain the metadata for the file we opened. Note that many of the metadata are accessed as attributes without `()`, but `bounds()` is a function and needs parentheses. 

~~~
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.crs)
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.nodata)
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.bounds())
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.width)
print(raster_ams_b9.rio.height)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
EPSG:32631
0
(600000.0, 5790240.0, 709800.0, 5900040.0)
1830
1830
~~~
{: .output}

The Coordinate Reference System, or `raster_ams_b9.rio.crs`, is reported as the string `EPSG:32631`. The `nodata` value is encoded as 0 and the bounding box corners of our raster are represented by the output of `.bounds()` as a `tuple` (like a list but you can't edit it). The height and width match what we saw when we printed the `DataArray`, but by using `.rio.width` and `.rio.height` we can access these values if we need them in calculations.

We will be exploring this data throughout this episode. By the end of this episode, you will be able to understand and explain the metadata output.

> > ## Data Tip - Object names

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ## Tip - Variable names
```

> To improve code readability, file and object names should be used that make it clear what is in the file. The data for this episode covers Amsterdam, and is from Band 9, so we'll use a naming convention of `raster_ams_b9`.
{: .callout}

## Visualize a Raster

> After viewing the attributes of our raster, we can examine the raw values of the array with `.values`:

Author: ```suggestion
After view the attributes of our raster, we can examine the raw values of the array with `.values`:
```

~~~
raster_ams_b9.values
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
array([[[    0,     0,     0, ...,  8888,  9075,  8139],
        [    0,     0,     0, ..., 10444, 10358,  8669],
        [    0,     0,     0, ..., 10346, 10659,  9168],
        ...,
        [    0,     0,     0, ...,  4295,  4289,  4320],
        [    0,     0,     0, ...,  4291,  4269,  4179],
        [    0,     0,     0, ...,  3944,  3503,  3862]]], dtype=uint16)
~~~
{: .output}

This can give us a quick view of the values of our array, but only at the corners. Since our raster is loaded in python as a `DataArray` type, we can plot this in one line similar to a pandas `DataFrame` with `DataArray.plot()`.

~~~
raster_ams_b9.plot()

> ~~~

Reviewer 3: The band as titled in the image is different from the band from sentinel 2 data (this is also what is referred to as band in Episodes 1-4). This could be confusing - a note explaining the two different bands could be useful.

In a quick view of the image, we can find that half of the image is blank, we can see that the pixels with high values are the cloud coverage on the top, and the contrast of everything else is quite low. This is within expectation because `B09` is by definition sensitive to the water vapors. However if one would like to have a more detailed view of the ground pixels, one can also make the plot with the option `robust=True`:

~~~
raster_ams_b9.plot(robust=True)
~~~
{: .language-python}
<img src="../fig/E06-02-overview-plot-B09-robust.png" title="Raster plot with rioxarray using the robust setting" alt="Raster plot with robust setting" width="612" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

Now the color limit is set in a way fitting most of the values in the image. We have a better view of the ground pixels.

Another information that we're interested in is the CRS, and it can be accessed with `.rio.crs`. We introduced the concept of a CRS in [an earlier

> episode](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/geospatial-python/03-crs/index.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
episode]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/03-crs.md %}).
```

Reviewer 2: For more info on how to link to different episodes, see [lesson formatting in carpentries](https://carpentries.github.io/lesson-example/04-formatting/index.html#locations-and-names)

Now we will see how features of the CRS appear in our data file and what

> meanings they have.

Reviewer 2: Let's move it to its section below.

## View Raster Coordinate Reference System (CRS) in Python

> We can view the CRS string associated with our Python object using the `crs`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another information that we're interested in is the CRS, and it can be accessed with `.rio.crs`. We introduced the concept of a CRS in [an earlier
episode]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/03-crs.md %}).
Now we will see how features of the CRS appear in our data file and what
meanings they have. We can view the CRS string associated with our Python object using the `crs`
```

- bounds: (0.0, 0.0, 6.0, 84.0)
Coordinate Operation:
- name: UTM zone 31N
- method: Transverse Mercator
Datum: World Geodetic System 1984 ensemble
- Ellipsoid: WGS 84
- Prime Meridian: Greenwich
~~~
{: .output}

* **Name** of the projection is UTM zone 31N (UTM has 60 zones, each 6-degrees of longitude in width). The underlying datum is WGS84.
* **Axis Info**: the CRS shows a Cartesian system with two axes, easting and northing, in meter units.
* **Area of Use**: the projection is used for a particular range of longitudes `0°E to 6°E` in the northern hemisphere (`0.0°N to 84.0°N`)
* **Coordinate Operation**: the operation to project the coordinates (if it is projected) onto a cartesian (x, y) plane. Transverse Mercator is accurate for areas with longitudinal widths of a few degrees, hence the distinct UTM zones.
* **Datum**: Details about the datum, or the reference point for coordinates. `WGS 84` and `NAD 1983` are common datums. `NAD 1983` is [set to be replaced in 2022](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datum_of_2022).

Note that the zone is unique to the UTM projection. Not all CRSs will have a

> zone. Below is a simplified view of US UTM zones. Image source: Chrismurf at English Wikipedia, via [Wikimedia Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Transverse_Mercator_coordinate_system#/media/File:Utm-zones-USA.svg) (CC-BY).

Reviewer 3: Is it interesting to show the EU zone here over the US zone? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Transverse_Mercator_coordinate_system#/media/File:LA2-Europe-UTM-zones.png (obtained from the same link.)

<img src="../images/Utm-zones-USA.svg" title="UTM zones over US" alt="The UTM zones across the continental United States." width="612" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

## Calculate Raster Statistics

> It is useful to know the minimum or maximum values of a raster dataset. In this
> case, given we are working with elevation data, these values represent the
> min/max elevation range at our site.
> 
> We can compute these and other descriptive statistics with `min`, `max`, `mean`, and `std`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is useful to know the minimum or maximum values of a raster dataset. We can compute these and other descriptive statistics with `min`, `max`, `mean`, and `std`.
```

~~~
print(raster_ams_b9.min())
print(raster_ams_b9.max())
print(raster_ams_b9.mean())
print(raster_ams_b9.std())
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(0, dtype=uint16)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(15497, dtype=uint16)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(1652.44009944)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(2049.16447495)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
~~~
{: .output}

> The information above includes a report of the min, max, mean, and standard deviation values, along with the data type.
> 
> If we want to see specific quantiles, we can use xarray's `.quantile()` method. For example for the 25% and 75% quartiles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The information above includes a report of the min, max, mean, and standard deviation values, along with the data type. If we want to see specific quantiles, we can use xarray's `.quantile()` method. For example for the 25% and 75% quartiles:
```

```python
print(raster_ams_b9.quantile([0.25, 0.75]))
```
```
<xarray.DataArray (quantile: 2)>
array([   0., 2911.])
Coordinates:
  * quantile  (quantile) float64 0.25 0.75
```
{: .output}

> ## Data Tip - NumPy methods
> You could also get each of these values one by one using `numpy`.
> 
> ~~~
> import numpy
> print(numpy.percentile(raster_ams_b9, 25))
> print(numpy.percentile(raster_ams_b9, 75))
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
> ~~~
> 0.0
> 2911.0
> ~~~
> {: .output}
> You may notice that `raster_ams_b9.quantile` and `numpy.percentile` didn't require an argument specifying the axis or dimension along which to compute the quantile. This is because `axis=None` is the default for most numpy functions, and therefore `dim=None` is the default for most xarray methods. It's always good to check out the docs on a function to see what the default arguments are, particularly when working with multi-dimensional image data. To do so, we can use`help(raster_ams_b9.quantile)` or `?raster_ams_b9.percentile` if you are using jupyter notebook or jupyter lab.
{: .callout}

## Dealing with Missing Data

> So far: we have visualized a band of a Sentinel-2 scene, and calculated its statistics. However, there is one thing we also need to take into account: the missing value. As we have seen in the `raster_ams_b9.rio.nodata` field: the missing value is 0. Therefore when we plot the band data, or calculate the statistics, the missing value was not distinguished from the other values. Therefore, they may cause some unexpected results. For example, in the percentile we just calculated, the 25% percentile is still 0. This may simply refecting we have a lot of missing data in the raster.
> 
> An option to distinguish missing values from real data, is to use `nan` values to represent them. This can be done by specifying `masked=True` when loading the raster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So far, we have visualized a band of a Sentinel-2 scene and calculated its statistics. However, we need to take missing values into account. We have seen that missing values are 0 in the `raster_ams_b9.rio.nodata` field. If we plot the data or calculate the statistics, missing values are not distinguished from the other values. This causes some unexpected results, for example, the 25% percentile that we just calculated, is 0. This shows that there are a lot of missing values in the data. To distinguish missing values from real data, we can use `nan` to represent them. This can be done by specifying `masked=True` when loading the raster:
```

Author: Thanks for both of your comments on this. I combined both of your suggestions and made an updated version. Also took Francesco's advice to use the word "missing data rather than" missing value".

~~~
raster_ams_b9 = rioxarray.open_rasterio(items[0].assets["B09"].href, masked=True)
~~~
{: .language-python}

One can also use the `where` function to select all the pixels which are different from the `nodata` value of the raster:
~~~
raster_ams_b9.where(raster_ams_b9!=raster_ams_b9.rio.nodata)
~~~
{: .language-python}

Either way will change the `nodata` value from 0 to `nan`. Now if we do the statistics again, we will see the difference:
~~~
print(raster_ams_b9.min())
print(raster_ams_b9.max())
print(raster_ams_b9.mean())
print(raster_ams_b9.std())
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(8., dtype=float32)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(15497., dtype=float32)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(2477.405, dtype=float32)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
<xarray.DataArray ()>
array(2061.9539, dtype=float32)
Coordinates:
    spatial_ref  int64 0
~~~
{: .output}

> And if we plot the image, the `nodata` pixels will show as white, since they are not 0 anymore:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And if we plot the image, the `nodata` pixels are not shown because they are not 0 anymore:
```

![Raster plot with rioxarray using the robust setting no data](../fig/E06-03-overview-plot-B09-robust-with-nan.png)

> 

Author: Thx for the suggestion! I added an description to this part

## Raster Bands
So far we looked into a single band, `B09` of a Sentinel-2 scene. However, to get a better understanding of the AoI, one may also want to visualize a true-color overview of the region. Then the single band will not be sufficient in this case.

![Multi-band raster image](../images/dc-spatial-raster/single_multi_raster.png)

The `overview` asset in the Sentinel-2 scene is a multiband asset. Similar to `B09`, we can load it by its `href`:
~~~
raster_ams_overview = rioxarray.open_rasterio(items[0].assets['overview'].href)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
<xarray.DataArray (band: 3, y: 343, x: 343)>
[352947 values with dtype=uint8]
Coordinates:
  * band         (band) int64 1 2 3
  * x            (x) float64 6.002e+05 6.005e+05 ... 7.093e+05 7.096e+05
  * y            (y) float64 5.9e+06 5.9e+06 5.899e+06 ... 5.791e+06 5.79e+06
    spatial_ref  int64 0
Attributes:
    _FillValue:    0.0
    scale_factor:  1.0
    add_offset:    0.0
~~~
{: .output}

> The band number comes first when GeoTiffs are read with the `.open_rasterio()` function. As we can see in the `xarray.DataArray` object, the shape is `(band: 3, y: 343, x: 343)` now. There are three bands in the `xarray.DataArray` now. One can also check the shape in the `.shape` attribute:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The band number comes first when GeoTiffs are read with the `.open_rasterio()` function. As we can see in the `xarray.DataArray` object, the shape is `(band: 3, y: 343, x: 343)` now. There are three bands in the `xarray.DataArray` now. One can also check the shape using the `.shape` attribute:
```

~~~
raster_ams_overview.shape
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
(3, 343, 343)
~~~
{: .output}

> It's always a good idea to examine the shape of the raster array you are working with and make sure it's what you expect. Many functions, especially ones that plot images, expect a raster array to have a particular shape.

Reviewer 2: This sentence should move above. For example before the sentence `One can also check the shape in the .shape attribute`.

Author: Thx! I moved this entence

> One can visualize the multi-band data with the `DataArray.plot.imshow()` function:

Author: I added the following descriptions:

```
Note that the `DataArray.plot.imshow()` function make pre-assumptions on the RGB channels. It does not work directly on the multi-band data.
```

I think the application case is not always "RGB". For example sometimes people use infra-red to replace "red", and plot a "pseudo-color" image. Therefore I added note that it does not work directly for multi-band data.

~~~
raster_ams_overview.plot.imshow()
~~~
{: .language-python}

![Amsterdam true color overview](../fig/E06-04-overview-plot-true-color.png)

> ## Exercise: set the plotting aspect ratio

> > The true-color image we visualized is a little bit stretched. Can you visualize it with the right aspect? You can use the [Documentation](https://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.plot.imshow.html) of `DataArray.plot.imshow()` for help.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>  As seen in the figure above, the true-color image is stretched. Let's visualize it with the right aspect. You can use the [Documentation](https://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.plot.imshow.html) of `DataArray.plot.imshow()`.
```

>
>> ## Answers

> >> Since we know the height/width ratio is 1:1 (telling from the shape `(3, 343, 343)`), we can set the size of the image and force its ratio to be 1. For example, we can force the size to be 5 inches, and set `aspect=1`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should also add that both the `aspect` and `size` arguments should be provided and how they are linked? 

```suggestion
>> Since we know the height/width ratio is 1:1 (check the `rio.height` and `rio.width` attributes), we can set the aspect ratio to be 1. For example, we can choose the size to be 5 inches, and set `aspect=1`.
```

> >> Since we know the height/width ratio is 1:1 (telling from the shape `(3, 343, 343)`), we can set the size of the image and force its ratio to be 1. For example, we can force the size to be 5 inches, and set `aspect=1`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should also add that both the `aspect` and `size` arguments should be provided and how they are linked? 

```suggestion
>> Since we know the height/width ratio is 1:1 (check the `rio.height` and `rio.width` attributes), we can set the aspect ratio to be 1. For example, we can choose the size to be 5 inches, and set `aspect=1`.
```

<img src="../fig/E06-01-overview-plot-B09.png" title="Raster plot with rioxarray" alt="Raster plot with defualt setting" width="612" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

Nice plot! Notice that `rioxarray` helpfully allows us to plot this raster with spatial coordinates on the x and y axis (this is not the default in many cases with other functions or libraries).

> This plot shows the satellite measurement of the spectral band `B09` for an area that covers part of the Netherlands. According to the [Sentinel-2 documentaion](https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-2-msi/msi-instrument), this is a band with the central wavelength of 945nm, which is sensitive to water vapor. It has a spatial resolution of 60m. Note that the `band=1` in the image title indicates the total number of bands in the `DataArray`, but bot the Sentinel-2 band number `B09`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This plot shows the satellite measurement of the spectral band `B09` for an area that covers part of the Netherlands. According to the [Sentinel-2 documentaion](https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-2-msi/msi-instrument), this is a band with the central wavelength of 945nm, which is sensitive to water vapor. It has a spatial resolution of 60m. Note that the `band=1` in the image title indicates the total number of bands in the `DataArray`, but not the Sentinel-2 band number `B09`. 
```
